Add RFC for 'Enrich the information of Explain Analyze for TableScan' (#6396)
pingcap/tiflash: docs/design/2022-12-01-enrich-the-information-of-explain-analyze-for-tablescan.md

# Enrich the information of Explain Analyze for TableScan

- Author: [Yunyan Hong](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

## Introduction

Currently `Explain Analyze` show limited exection infos when SQL runs on TiFlash, mainly including:

- time: the time cost by executing this operator
- loops: the count of the blocks read by this operator, that is,  the number of times stream->read() is executed
- threads: The concurrency degree of this step, that is, the number of streams calculated at the same time
- actRows: The number of rows returned by the operator

![overview](./images/2022-12-01-enrich-the-information-of-explain-analyze-for-tablescan-1.png)

For the storage layer of TiFlash, `Explain Analyze` misses a lot of important and meaningful information, such as

- The number of rows/packs in DMFiles scanned in the `TableFullScan` operator
- The number of rows/packs in DMFiles skipped by the rough set index in `TableFullScan` operator
- The time to load rough set index in `TableFullScan` operator
- The time to read all related DMFiles in `TableFullScan` operator

> - The time to create snapshots in `TableFullScan` operator

Reviewer: What about `TableRangeScan`?

Reviewer 2: Is `TableRangeScan` brought into tidb recently? What's the difference between `TableFullScan` and `TableRangeScan`?
Usually, I only see `TableFullScan` in the `explain analyze ...` result

Reviewer: TableRangeScan is always there...
TableRangeScan is triggered when the where condition contains a primary key, both TableFullScan and TableRangeScan should be handled the same way on the TiFlash side.
```
mysql> CREATE TABLE test.test (
    ->   `pkey` smallint(28),
    ->   PRIMARY KEY CLUSTERED (pkey)
    -> );
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.08 sec)

mysql> ALTER TABLE test.test SET TIFLASH REPLICA 1;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.08 sec)

mysql> 
mysql> 
mysql> 
mysql> explain select * from test where pkey > 0;
+---------------------------+---------+--------------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
| id                        | estRows | task         | access object | operator info                                  |
+---------------------------+---------+--------------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
| TableReader_12            | 3333.33 | root         |               | data:ExchangeSender_11                         |
| └─ExchangeSender_11       | 3333.33 | mpp[tiflash] |               | ExchangeType: PassThrough                      |
|   └─TableRangeScan_10     | 3333.33 | mpp[tiflash] | table:test    | range:(0,+inf], keep order:false, stats:pseudo |
+---------------------------+---------+--------------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
```

Reviewer: like region based pruning

Author: When the condition in where is about primary key, it will be TableRangeScan instead of TableFullScan

- ...

Therefore, we consider putting more useful and meaningful information into `Explain Analyze`, to help us locate and analyze performance issues better.

In conclusion, this RFC makes `Explain Analyze` contain richer information about the TableFullScan operator on TiFlash.

## Background

The process of `Explain Analyze` can be divided into two parts, one is collecting the statistical information in TiFlash, the other one is sending the statistical information to TiDB.

![overview](./images/2022-12-01-enrich-the-information-of-explain-analyze-for-tablescan-2.png)

### Collecting statistical information in TiFlash

Class `ExecutionSummaryCollector` is responsible for the collection of statistical information. It mainly collects statistical information from the following streams:

1. Collect from the streams in `dag_context.getInBoundIOInputStreamsMap()`
    - `dag_context.getInBoundIOInputStreamsMap()` mainly contains:
        - IO stream for storage level in the local node and remote nodes
        - The stream of interaction between tiflash nodes, which is `ExchangeReceiverInputStream`(for mpp) and `CoprocessorBlockInputStream`(for remote read)

>     - Now we just collect the execution summary from `ExchangeReceiverInputStream` and `CoprocessorBlockInputStream`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Before this proposal, we just collect the execution summary from `ExchangeReceiverInputStream` and `CoprocessorBlockInputStream`.
```

2. Collect from various `IProfilingBlockInputStream` in `dag_context.getProfileStreamsMap()`
    - `IProfilingBlockInputStream` has one member called `BlockStreamProfileInfo info`, which stores the profiling information. When doing `IProfilingBlockInputStream::read`, it will simultaneously update the `BlockStreamProfileInfo info` based on the blocks the streams read.

`ExecutionSummaryCollector` combines all the collected statistical information of each stream based on their executor ids, and writes it into the `ExecutorExecutionSummary` of `SelectResponse`.

### Sending statistical information to TiDB

> `ExecutorExecutionSummary` is included in `SelectResponseand` and `SelectResponse` is wrapped in the data part of `MPPDataPacket`. Thus `ExecutorExecutionSummary` is sent to TiDB along with `MPPDataPacket` sent to TiDB.

Reviewer: > in `SelectResponseand`
Is it expected?

Author: fix
